--- Page 1 ---
BRIEF ON HALLMARKING SCHEME 

Introduction 
Since ancient time Gold is considered as a store house of value in India. In villages, 
people invest in gold to keep them secured against inflation and to be able to raise loans 
by mortgaging it in the time of need. A large number of artisans buy gold to handcraft 
magnificent jewellery for domestic as well as export market. In recent years annual 
demand for gold has been in the range of 600 - 800 tonnes. 
Background 
2. Gold is too soft to with stand wear, therefore, for jewellery making, gold is 
always alloyed with some other metal. The need for alloying of gold also makes public 
extremely vulnerable to excessive adulteration. Detection of adulteration in gold is 
difficult without performing technical tests. The complex nature of Indian jewellery 
mostly made of high caratage gold and containing numerous soldered joints of much 
lower caratage makes the job of determination of purity even more difficult. In addition, 
24 carat plating of articles of low caratage is also common. The common consumer 
though wel l aware of such malpractices still has no option but to submit himself to 
repeated cheating by unscrupulous traders. 
3. It was in this background that Government of India took cognizance of the need 
for protecting consumers. A mandate was, therefore, give n to Reserve Bank of India 
(RBI) Standing Committee on Gold and Precious Metals to look into the issues relating to 
Standardization of Gold products and introduction of Gold Hallmarking in the country. 
The Committee identified Bureau of Indian Standards (B IS) in the year 2000 as the sole 
agency to operate the Hallmarking Scheme in India, and entrusted BIS with the task of 
implementing hallmarking scheme to protect the consumer against cheating, develop 
export competitiveness and make India a leading market for gold jewellery in the world. 
The Scheme for Hallmarking of Silver articles was launched later in 2005. 
Hallmarking 
2.1 Hallmarking is the accurate determination and official recording of the proportionate 
content of precious metal in the jewellery/artefacts or bullion/coins. 
Quality control order for mandatory hallmarking of gold jeweller y/artefacts has been 
issued on 23 June 2021 by the Govt. of India which makes hallmarking mandatory in 256 
districts of the country where there is atleast one assaying and hallmarking centre. The 
mandatory hallmarking order is applicable on 14, 18 and 22 carats of gold 
jewellery/artefacts only. 
2.2 For hallmarking of jewellery, a jeweler who wants to sell hallmarked jewellery has to 
obtain a registration fr om BIS. The registration of jeweler’s process has been made 
online. The jeweler fills the application form online , and the registration is granted

--- Page 2 ---
instantly and can be downloaded by the jeweler. The registration of jewelers is free and 
valid for life time. 
2.3 The registered jeweler submits the jewellery for hallmarking to BIS recognized 
Assaying & Hallmarking (A&H) centre. A&H centres are the testing centres where the 
jewellery is tested. After testing, the A&H centre applies hallmark on the jewellery which 
is found meeting the requirement of the standard. 
2.4 The A&H centre can apply for recognition to BIS online. The recognition is granted 
to A&H c entres for hallmarking of jewellery/artefacts after verifying the infrastructure 
requirements, capabil ity and competency of personnel to car ry out assaying & 
hallmarking. Entire process of recognitio n, which involves audit of the c entres, 
submission of audit report, and grant of recognition or renewal, has been automated. 

2.5 BIS has developed digital so lution wherein the entire workflow in assaying and 
hallmarking centre is automated and made online. The jeweler will submit the request 
for hallmarking online and the data for all the processes undertaken in the centre from 
inward receipt and weighment, X RF, Sampling, Fireassay and laser marking is 
maintained online and can be monitored on real time basis. At the end of the testing , a 
unique six digit alpha numerical code is generated from the BIS server for each jewellery 
article and is laser marked by t he assaying and hallmarking centre on the jewellery 
alongwith BIS logo and purity mark. 

2.6 Earlier ( Before 1 July 2021) hallmarked Jewellery consist of following four marks: 

BIS Mark 
Purity in carat and fineness for gold 
(e.g.22K916,18K750, 14K585 ) 
In case of silver only fineness of 
990,970,925,900,835,800 
Assay centre’s 
identification 
mark / number 
Jewellers 
identification 
mark/number 

With the introduction of six digit alphanumeric code from 1 July 2021, the four marks 
have now been replaced by three marks for gold jewellery/ artefacts as given below 

BIS Mark 
Purity in carat and fineness for gold 
(e.g.22K916,18K750, 14K585 ) 

Six digit alphanumeric code 
AAAAAA 

2.7 The Indian Standard on Gold Hallmarking IS 1417:2016 specifies three grades for 
hallmarking of gold jewellery/ artefacts which are 14 Carat, 18 Carat and 22 Carat . The 
same has been amended to include additional grades of 20 carat, 23 carat and 24 carats. 
Indian standard on Silver hallmarking IS 2112: 2014 specifies six grades of silver alloys 
viz 990,970,925,900,835,800 used in the manufacture of jewellery/artefacts of silver. 
2.8 Hallmarking charges for the jewellery are - Rs.35/- per piece for gold jewellery and 
Rs.25/- per piece for silver jewellery irrespective of the weight of the jewellery.

--- Page 3 ---
2.9 After grant of registration to jeweller, BIS periodically visit the sales outlet(s) and 
randomly draws sample of Hallmarked article as on sale and gets it tested according to 
the relevant Indian Standard at its own referral assay labs at Chennai, Sahibabad and 
Kolkata to ascertain the purity of the precious metal content in the sample. In case of 
failure of sample, action is taken on both the jeweller and the assaying and hallmarking 
centre . BIS also carries out periodic surveillance audit of the A&H centre to ascertain its 
continuation with the specified requirements. 
2.10 For hallmarking of gold bullion and coins of fineness 995 and 999 parts per 
thousand a refinery or a mint obtains a license and applies hallmark during the 
manufacturing. At present 44 refineries have taken licence from BIS for refining of gold. 
Growth of Hallmarking Scheme 
3.1 As on 31 December 2021, around 1 lakh 30 thousand Jewellers have taken 
registration from BIS f or selling hallmarked jewellery and artefacts while 1004 BIS 
recognized assaying and hallmarking centers are operative in the country. In the past, in a 
year maximum number of jewellery hallmarked was 4.49 crore in the year 2018 -2019. 
However, after the launch of automation software, around 5.5 crore jewellery have been 
hallmarked with HUID in the period from 1st July 2021 to 31 December 2021.