--- Page 1 ---
Guidelines for supporting other Laboratories for creation/augmentation of
test facilities in critical areas

1. Eligibility: Laboratories owned or fully or partially funded by the Central
Government; institutions of higher education; private organisations running
laboratories for R&D purposes or on not-for-profit basis shall be eligible for support.

2. Application for the scheme: The organisation desirous of setting up the
Testing Facility shall send a proposal to the Bureau through the Central or State
Government Department/Ministry concerned with the following.

a. Details of location and management along with the contact details of the
Laboratory.
b. Nature of relationship with the Department/Ministry.

- c. Test facility(s) proposed to be created or augmented.

d. Details of existing test facility(s) with scope thereof.

e. Indian Standards related to the test facilities proposed.

f. Detailed justification for the test facility proposed.

g. Existing testing capacity and the inflow of samples during last one year, in case,
augmentation is proposed.

h. Details of financial assistance received from government.

i. Annual turn-over.

j. Any other Information as required for the examination of the proposal.

3. Screening Committee: The composition of the Screening Committee shall be
as follows:

a. Additional Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs- Chairperson

b. DDG (Laboratories), BIS — Member

c. Representative from QCI (not below the rank of Director or equivalent) —
Member

d. Representative from CSIR (not below the rank of Director or equivalent) —
Member

e. Representative from the Ministry/Department seeking assistance (not below the
rank of Director or equivalent) - Member

f. Representative of the Finance department of the Bureau - Member

g. Representative from IFD of DoCA — Member h. Head LRMD, BIS - Convener.

The Committee may invite or co-opt any person on the above Committee, if
required.

4. The Committee shall examine the potential for utilisation, viability; and
sustainability of the proposals received for support and make suitable
recommendations.

5. Screening Committee shall submit its recommendation to the Department of
Consumer Affairs for approval, so that timely assistance is provided to the project
and the same shall be placed before GC for its approval.

--- Page 2 ---
6. Scope of Support:

a. After the proposal is approved by the Governing Council of the Bureau, the
organization seeking support shall procure and install the equipment, strictly
in accordance with the letter through which the approval of the Governing
Council is conveyed. BIS will release financial assistance on receiving the
report of the procurement and installation of the equipment. Before release of
payment, BIS will depute a team of officials to verify the installation of
equipment.

b. Imported Goods: BIS shall provide co-operation to get the Letter of Credit
(LC) opened by the tendering organization for payment to foreign supplier. In
case transfer of funds is required for the purpose of opening of LC, the
tendering organization shall produce an indemnity bond/bank guarantee to
the effect that the funds so transferred will be refunded to BIS within three
months of cancellation of the purchase order or tendering process in case the
same is warranted due to any unforeseen circumstances.

c. Adequate space with necessary infrastructure like electrical power, electrical
fittings, water connection etc. shall be provided by the organisation seeking
support.

d. Operation, management and maintenance of the test facility shall be the
responsibility of the organisation seeking support.

e. Technical manpower will be provided by the organisation seeking support.

f. Expenditure towards the purchase of consumables and other day-to-day
commodities required for running the facility shall be arranged by the
organisation seeking support.

g. The Bureau shall arrange for the capacity building for running of the facility, if
requested.

h. The organisation shall obtain an insurance of the equipment procured along
with any high value items. °

i. Utilisation of revenue from testing charges shall accrue fully to the
organisation housing the test facility without the Bureau taking any share of it.

j. A representative of BIS shall be there in the Purchase committee of
organisation procuring the equipment with the financial assistance from BIS.
The meetings of purchase committee should, as far as possible, be held
virtually, and proceeding thereof be recorded for optimum transparency.

7. The Bureau from time to time will undertake audit of the facility to ensure its
proper utilisation.

8. If the test facility is found to be un-utilised or not utilised properly, the equipment
and other items provided by the Bureau can be withdrawn with the approval of the
Governing Council.
